Section 61.--Gross Income Defined


26 CFR 1.61-3: Gross income derived from business.
(Also § 162; 1.162-1.)




Rev. Rul. 2008-26


ISSUE

        Are Medicaid Rebates that a pharmaceutical manufacturer pays to State

Medicaid Agencies adjustments to the sales price in calculating gross receipts, or are

they ordinary and necessary business expenses that are deductible from gross income

under § 162 of the Internal Revenue Code?

FACTS

        M, who uses an accrual method of accounting and files returns on a calendar

year basis, manufactures and sells prescription drugs. In 1992, M entered into a

“Rebate Agreement” with the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)

pursuant to the Medicaid Rebate Program established by the Omnibus Budget

Reconciliation Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-508, 104 Stat. 1388 (1990) (the Act).

        The Medicaid Rebate Program is designed to reduce the cost of drugs paid for

by the Medicaid Program and to increase Medicaid beneficiaries’ access to prescription

drugs. Under the Act, pharmaceutical manufacturers must sign a “Rebate Agreement”
                                            2
with HHS (who acts on behalf of each State Medicaid Agency) to gain access to the

Medicaid-funded segment of the pharmaceutical market.

      The Rebate Agreements require pharmaceutical manufacturers to pay Medicaid

Rebates directly to each State Medicaid Agency. A Medicaid Rebate is a portion of the

price paid by State Medicaid Agencies to retailers for covered outpatient drugs

dispensed to Medicaid beneficiaries. The amount of the Medicaid Rebate is designed

to ensure that the Medicaid Program is charged no more for covered outpatient drugs

than any other purchaser. See H.R. Rep. No. 101-881 at 96 (1990).

      In 2005, the following events occur: (1) M sells Product D, a prescription drug, to

W, a wholesaler; (2) W sells Product D to R, a retail pharmacy; (3) R dispenses Product

D to individual A, a Medicaid beneficiary, and then files a reimbursement claim with S, a

State Medicaid Agency; (4) S approves the claim and then reimburses R for the cost of

Product D plus a dispensing fee; and (5) M pays a Medicaid Rebate to S pursuant to the

Rebate Agreement.

LAW AND ANALYSIS

      Section 61(a) provides that, except as otherwise provided, gross income means

all income from whatever source derived. Section 1.61-3(a) of the Income Tax

Regulations provides that in a manufacturing, merchandising, or mining business,

"gross income" means the total sales, less the cost of goods sold, plus any income from

investments and from incidental or outside operations or sources.

      Section 162 allows as a deduction all the ordinary and necessary expenses paid

or incurred during the taxable year in carrying on any trade or business. Section
                                              3
1.162-1(a) provides, in part, that business expenses deductible from gross income

include the ordinary and necessary expenditures directly connected with or pertaining to

the taxpayer's trade or business.

       In Pittsburgh Milk Co. v. Commissioner, 26 T.C. 707 (1956), nonacq. 1959-2 C.B.

8-9, nonacq. withdrawn and acq. 1962-2 C.B. 5-6, acq. withdrawn and nonacq. 1976-2

C.B. 3-4, and nonacq. withdrawn in part and acq. in part 1982-2 C.B. 2, the Tax Court

addressed whether allowances, discounts, or rebates paid by a milk producer to certain

purchasers of its milk, in willful violation of state law, are adjustments to the purchase

price of the milk resulting in a reduced sales price, or ordinary and necessary business

expenses under § 162 (in which case no deduction would be allowed under the rules of

§ 162(c)). The court reasoned that for income derived from the sale of property, in

determining gain, the amount realized must be based on the actual price or

consideration for which the property was sold and not on some greater price for which it

possibly should have been, but was not, sold. The court focused on the facts and

circumstances of the transaction, what the parties intended, and the purpose or

consideration for which the allowance was made. The court found that the allowances

were part of the sales transaction and concluded that gross income must be computed

on the price for which the milk was actually sold. Thus, under Pittsburgh Milk, where a

payment is made from a seller to a purchaser, and the purpose and intent of the parties

is to reach an agreed upon selling price, the payment is properly viewed as an

adjustment to the purchase price that reduces gross sales.
                                             4
       In contrast, in United Draperies, Inc. v. Commissioner, 41 T.C. 457 (1964), aff’d,

340 F.2d 936 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 382 U.S. 813 (1965), the Tax Court held that a

drapery manufacturer could not exclude from income kickbacks paid to employees of

the companies that purchased the taxpayer’s draperies. The court noted that the

kickbacks were made to employees of its customers and were “independent of its

agreement with its purchasers fixing the selling price of the products sold,” and that

“[t]hese amounts were paid for a consideration separate from the selling price of its

products, namely these employees sending the business of their employers to petitioner

....” United Draperies at 465.

       Rev. Rul. 76-96, 1976-1 C.B. 23, addresses the tax treatment of rebates paid by

an automobile manufacturer to retail customers. The manufacturer offered rebates of a

set amount to retail customers who independently negotiated at arm’s length with one of

the manufacturer’s dealers to arrive at a purchase price for a new car. The ruling holds

that the rebates reduce the purchase price of the cars and are not includible in the retail

customer’s gross income. The ruling further holds that the manufacturer may deduct

the rebates as ordinary and necessary business expenses under § 162.

       The Medicaid Rebate is paid by M to S pursuant to the terms of the rebate

agreement. Under the purpose and intent test of Pittsburgh Milk, the Medicaid Rebate

is a factor used in setting the actual selling price, negotiated and agreed to before the

sale to W takes place.

HOLDING
                                             5
       Medicaid Rebates that a pharmaceutical manufacturer pays to State Medicaid

Agencies are adjustments to the sales price in calculating gross receipts. This holding

is limited to Medicaid Rebates that a pharmaceutical manufacturer pays pursuant to the

Medicaid Rebate Program established by the Act.

EFFECT ON OTHER DOCUMENTS

       Rev. Rul. 2005-28, 2005-1 C.B. 997, is clarified and superseded. Rev. Rul.

2005-28 suspended, in part, Rev. Rul. 76-96. Whether a rebate of the type described in

Rev. Rul. 76-96 is an ordinary and necessary business expense or, alternatively, is an

adjustment to the sales price in calculating gross receipts, is an issue under

reconsideration. Therefore, pending the Service’s reconsideration of the issue and

publication of subsequent guidance, the Service will not apply, and taxpayers may not

rely on, the conclusion of Rev. Rul. 76-96 that rebates made by the manufacturer are

ordinary and necessary business expenses deductible under § 162.

DRAFTING INFORMATION

       The principal author of this revenue ruling is Susie K. Bird of the Office of

Associate Chief Counsel (Income Tax and Accounting). For further information

regarding this revenue ruling, contact Ms. Bird on (202) 622-4950 (not a toll-free call).
